# Stress-in-the-city-

Urban wildlife must cope with diverse challenges and stressors, including human presence. However, additionally to being a disturbance, humans can also provide energy-rich food and protection from predators. We evaluated the impact of human presence on red-winged starlings (Onychognathus morio) in a highly urbanized environment using faecal glucocorticoid metabolite (fGCM) concentrations as a stress-related biomarker. We performed an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) challenge to validate a non-invasive method for quantifying glucocorticoids in red-winged starlings. Using this method, we quantified fGCMs in excreta collected from free-living starlings during weekdays (high human presence) and weekends (low human presence) to determine the birds’ responses to fluctuating human numbers. Following the ACTH challenge, starlings’ circulating glucocorticoid (GC) concentrations increased by 127% within 30 min and the corresponding fGCM concentrations increased within 1 h of injection. Of the four enzyme immunoassays (EIA) tested, an 11-oxoaetiocholanolone EIA, performed best, detecting a 310% in fGCM concentrations post-ACTH challenge. Free-living red-winged starlings showed an overall 30.4% lower fGCM concentrations on weekdays compared to weekends and a negative relationship between fGCM concentrations and human foot traffic. Red-winged starlings consume a higher proportion anthropogenic food on weekdays than weekends, and we cannot rule out a possible diet-related alteration in gut passage time that could affect fGCM concentrations. However, this correlation between fGCMs and human foot traffic may also suggest urban red-winged starlings benefit from human presence. Our results raise the possibility that, under certain conditions, the benefits associated with human presence outweigh potential negative effects associated with human activity.
